---
title: "UBInterested"
description: ""
date: 2023-07-06
cover: ""
coverAlt: ""
tags: []
toc: true
katex: true
---

Recently "friendlies" were hosting UBI shills, stabbing us in the back and twisting 
the knife, so I had to write to defend MMT.

I am so bitter about this I cannot name names, because that would imply 
friendly banter. I have to attack the ideas. There is *nothing* friendly about 
UBI, the UBI is a direct frontal attack on the working class. I have to fight 
back for workers.

When I name names, like Jason Hickel, Steve Keen, or Michael Hudson, or 
Paul Krugman, or Richard Wolff, and have something against their ideas to say, 
I'm always doing it in a good faith friendly way. That's because I trust (some of) 
these people. That is, I trust they are writing or speaking in good faith. Sometimes 
I see their ideas are born out of ignorance (that's you Kruggers), and so results in 
straw-manning MMT, but I can usually see where the fault lies, and so will not 
shy from calling them out. I know full well I could be misinterpreting them, or 
might even have things wrong myself on the facts.

However, <font style="color: #B87333;">UBI</font> and 
<font style="color: #FFF380;">crypto-noncurrency</font> are different stories. These are things that 
act directly against working class interests, and in the most insidious ways --- 
since it is not hard to "sell" a good decent honest working class pleb on these 
ideas.  Who doesn't want to get-rich-quick (crypto) or have free money without 
earning it (UBI)?  (Apart from me that is.)

Crypto is worse than gold, it is gold mentality without the gold, without a real 
resource. What is the resource crypto relies upon? It is not "Trust" as the crypto 
shills claim, since as Cory Doctorow has repeatedly warned, all electronic ledger 
schemes and the like ultimately depend upon a legal framework and trust of people, 
not encrypted software. People who think crypto has digitalised trust are delusional, 
and have not fully thought it all through.

If you want "proof-of-work" how about showing me some muffins you made for lunch, 
or some high energy electrons you produced to help fuel my GPU. 
Phucckin' crypto-phuckers.

Try waving your distributed ledger at an Afghan warlord whose land your ledger says 
you own. (OK, that's not a real example, but it makes the point.)

Your crypto does not give you a claim on anything because no one promises to redeem. 
If you can however find a bigger fool than you, you can take their *state currency* 
(or drugs, or whatever) off them and give them your bitcoin. But that was not a 
promise of redemption. The trust in the security of a digital ledger is not real 
trust in humanity.

But this article is not the anti-crypto one, that'll come later.


## Big f-ing Problem Up-Front

Hell yes people need money. We need state currency to pay tax liabilities and meet 
reasonable savings desires (short of gross hoarding, i.e., sales for making profit 
for the sake of profit and nothing else, no public interest just money fetish).

This is however not a case for UBI.

Only an idiot or neoliberal would consider UBI a necessity. Only a rentier would 
consider UBI both necessary and good. Neoliberals practically make UBI seem like a 
necessity. So I can understand in a neoliberal era people think UBI might be a good 
idea. The point is we should work to destroy neoliberalism, not to patch it up with a 
UBI. We should work to euthanise the rentiers, not feed them from the poisoned 
wellspring of UBI.

## The Real Brainworms

However, this "patched-up neoliberalism" idea is still brainworms. Even under 
neoliberalism a UBI is a policy of lunatics. Why issue currency to people who 
already have enough to pay taxes and keep some savings? It makes no sense. 

If I am straw-manning the UBI shills forgive me, but pray-tell what is a UBI if 
it is not universal? If it is not universal then stop calling it a UBI for godssake.

At worst 
governments who are neoliberal could issue a *Basic Income Guarantee* so people do 
not starve or suffer long term bank debt. From an MMT perspective (an anti-neoliberal 
political economy if ever there was one) a Basic Income Guarantee is practical, fits 
public purpose, and is wise and just. A UBI is all the opposite.

However, it is *how* a Basic Income Guarantee is implemented that matters, a BIG 
itself can be done poorly to similarly undermine real wealth as a UBI would. So 
even a BIG needs some considerate policy thought, not a welfare hand-out mindset.

> The correct mindset for a Job Guarantee and Basic Income Guarantee is reciprocity, 
not welfare. All social welfare is produced and generated by the working class, not 
by government hand-outs.

UBI, in other words, is a giant "fuck you!" to workers. I am bitterly opposed to UBI.

Governments can always issue enough currency to meet our capacity to pay their 
imposed tax liabilities plus our reasonable savings desires. No UBI is necessary 
for this. Consider,

1. Anyone able to contribute for public local community purpose can be recompensed 
with a decent full living wage plus benefits. This is called reciprocity. It is 
righteous. 
2. Any social good anyone does living off a UBI hand-out or wage subsidy should be 
recognized as a contribution to society meriting a decent living wage, not a social 
welfare pittance.
3. UBI is a claim on someone else's labour --- usually some poor worker in the global 
south --- and for nothing in return. UBI is disgusting.
4. Pensions and social welfare payments are called "civilisation" and are not a 
UBI. They establish a type of BIG. But with full employment the BIG would be more 
substantial, because real resources would be backing the claims the welfare 
beneficiaries have rights, as member of society, to claim.

UBI is anti-civilisation and pro-individualism and greed. UBI is the sick mentality 
of, "I exist, therefore I have a right to claim the fruits of someone else's labour 
while providing them nothing real in return."

I am sure leftists who advocate a UBI simply *know not what they do.*


### What About Taxing the Rich?

There is no need to use a UBI as an excuse to tax the rich. If we do not want people 
hoarding obscene amounts of state currency we should tax them because we do not want 
people hoarding obscene amounts of state currency.

Currency hoarding of the obscene variety distorts democracy, and we would not need 
any other excuse to tax obscene hoarders to the high hilt. They are not the job creators.

If you do run a UBI, the tax on the rich goes back to them as UBI + rents. There is 
no public purpose served by such policy, it is profoundly regressive and does nothing 
to generate real output people need today. If governments need to stimulate demand, 
they can always choose to raise the minimum wage, and preferably by implementing a Job 
Guarantee at a living wage floor.

It makes no sense to use a UBI for this purpose. 

Any self-interested pursuit to u=skill or start a business, or other private 
enterprise justifies bank credit. But if it also fits with a public purpose then such 
skill training needs can be incorporated into a Job Guarantee scheme. A proper wage for proper work. If it fits public purpose it can be admitted into a Job Guarantee schedule, no further questions asked. No enterprising individual with greta ideas should have to fund their endeavour using a pittanc eof a UBI.

### What About Human Freedom and Liberty?

A Job Guarantee gives workers the power to tell exploitative employers to piss off. In 
a monetary economy of any type (capitalist or socialist or a mix) there is hardly any 
greater proletarian power short of a dictatorship of the proletariat (who are not 
going to be running a UBI). But the Job Guarantee wage has to be a decent living 
inclusive wage. UBI undermines the capacity to afford workers a decent living wage, 
since a UBI adds all demand for zero supply.
 
UBI is pro-inflationary in a bad way.
 
A Job Guarantee is a counter-cyclical stabiliser, so is pro-inflationary only in a 
credit crunch end of a cycle, so is deflationary on the way up, inflationary on the 
way down, which is exactly what any wise person would recommend. A UBI on the other 
hand, to act counter-cyclically, needs policy decision adjustment, which is not 
automatic, so is not what we should want, since it'll keep us hostage to the policy 
makers, who clearly do not always have public interest to heart.

UBI empowers fascism (I claim). Why? Because the hand-out is all up to the 
government to dispense, like a Cesar. UBI firstly props up neoliberalism, and we 
all know neoliberalism is the precursor to support for fascism. Yes, fascism always 
ends, and never ends well, but we do not have to go through fascism to get to 
socialism and/or liberal democracy without the austerity.

A Job Guarantee enshrined in Law is more freedom, since it is a claim the worker has 
on the state. The UBI is a claim a non-worker has on someone else's labour. F-ing 
disgusting.

### Isn't a Job Guarantee Fetishising "Work"?

F-off with that bullsh1t. Honest work for public service is righteous. There is no 
implied fetish. 

Slave labour for a boss who is producing crap and can sell it using clever 
marketing or crony government subsidies, is the bullsh1t here. That's also 
bullsh1t work. Yes, you should not fetishise bullsh1t work.

Work performed in the spirit of service to humanity is the opposite of this, it 
is good, righteous and should only be encouraged and rewarded. In a monetary 
economy claiming the work itself should be "its own reward" is bullsh1t. 

I am thoroughly against "volunteerism". If someone volunteers for public purpose 
work, pay them. If the charity cannot pay them the government Job Guarantee can. 
If they do not need the currency you can accept it back off them if they want to 
donate and be considered a volunteer proper.  The rightful "Volunteer" is the one 
who volunteers to return their wages. But we have to pay them first, which is to 
definitely *not* fetishise the labour, it's the opposite, it is recognition, not 
fetishisation.

UBI shills are the fetishists here. The fetish of the false promise of 
"freedom from work."

If we get a boatload of machine automation there will still be work do to, the 
good thing about automation is this new work could be almost 100% pleasant and 
desirable, like solving difficult unsolved math problems, or producing amazing 
art work that cannot be automated. We can redefine the meaning of work, it can 
be service to humanity. That is a spiritual outlook, the opposite of a fetish.


### Isn't Social Welfare Already a UBI of Sorts?

"... so why not ramp up social welfare and run a UBI policy, huuh?"

That would be retarded.

Social welfare payments and pensions are *not UBI*. Pensions and social welfare 
are simply good policy if you want a civilised society where we take care of all.
Especially we take care of those who lack the capacity to take care of themselves.

How do we do that best? Not with currency. We do it with work, to produce socially 
necessary output people first of all *need* to live a decent life, and second of all 
desire to consume sustainably. Paying people living wages, not slave wages, to do the 
sometimes sh1t but not bullsh1t work is how we do this.

The currency is on the back-end to ensure fair distribution, not to generate the 
output.

I know UBI is strong in Scandanavia, Alaska, Canada and South Africa. Please stay 
away from New Zealand, we don't want you phuckers around here destroying our 
politics (TOP Party get lost you bastard over-educated liberal elite wankers).


## Not a good argument - but who supports UBI?

Apart from insane libertarians, the major supporters of UBI are dorks like 
Elon Musk, Bill Gates, and Jeff Bezos. (Also dorks like the late David Graeber 
whose other work I respect and admire. Good people can say stupid sh1t.) Actually I 
do not know they do support UBI, but people like them do. They know they need workers 
to buy their crap. They do not want to fairly pay their workers. So... UBI man! 
(Cock-suuuuckeeers.)

Good enough argument for me against UBI.


### How is UBI Not a Trojan Horse for Capital?

I am not a social scientist, so can only speculate here, but it seems to me 
people who support UBI are people who are one or more of: (a) completely blind 
to class warfare, (b) ignorant of macroeconomics, (c) are well-to-do and have a 
legitimate concern for the poor, but who also lack a proper class analysis, 
(d) out-right neoliberals, or maybe non-authoritarian authoritarians.

Point (d)** concerns people who do not even realise it is a form of lauding it over 
the poor to offer them a UBI hand-out. I call it welfarism. It is gross. The 
spiritual principle is to give to people *before they are in need of welfare or 
charity*.  UBI is, no mistake about it, charity form the state. But it is worse, 
since it goes to everyone, so is not charity. It looks like charity, but it is not 
charity.

There is no dignity in receiving charity. Charity is good. But the point is we should 
work so that it is not needed. The point of charitable organizations is to put 
themselves out of business. 

A UBI cheque can only get you what workers are willing to be subjugated to 
produce. No one really wants to work. Everyone would rather play. But someone has 
to work.

When the State uses welfare policy as the anti-poverty lever, it is creating 
dependency. Social welfare needs to be a safety net, for correction of government 
policy mistakes, and the goal should be to eliminate those mistakes. When we 
eliminate the policy mistakes that create a need for welfare then we have greater 
human dignity and greater freedom from oppression. Having to depend upon charity s a 
form of oppression. That doesn't mean giving out of charity or state welfare is a bad 
thing, it is not, it is a good thing when it is needed. The superior idea is to build 
a society where it is not needed. UBI does next to nothing to help with this.

What? Do you think people relying on a UBI are just going to rise up, self-organize,  
and provide private social services themselves out of the goodness of their hearts? 

The way we eliminate need for charity is to provide people with the goods and 
services they need to live a decent life. This is why on the progressive left side of 
politics we always favour the superior "universality" abstraction of Universal Basic 
Services. A nation should be able to democratically decide what they want as UBS, and 
if they can be resourced the state can always make the payments.

No UBI is needed.

If the state uses a UBI policy then all that happens without public Universal Basic 
Services is the private for-profit corporations offer the services instead, along 
with wasteful advertising and marketing crud, and concomitant real cots that are 
needless, and all for soaking up the government UBI handout.

This is what we mean by UBI being a Trojan Horse for the rentier class.  They will 
gobble up your UBI by providing services the government is not providing, at much 
higher social and environmental real costs.  Pretty darn crazy. It is not progressive 
politics.

Do not think for one minute the tax "pay for" the UBI will help lower inequality. It 
will not. All taxes on the upper class and owners of capital get passed through to 
consumers. The UBI leaves the working class no better off *in relative terms* than 
before when they were in debt to banksters.


### How Does it Work Then in Alaska and Norway?

Where UBI seems to work (to reduce extreme poverty) it is always the case someone 
else is paying for it, and in real terms. Norway and Alaska sell oil. Someone else 
is paying for that, and those costs are passed on to workers somewhere else. There is 
also the environmental cost incurred, currently unaccounted for, and it is a 
significant real cost. That's the sort of cost that truly is going to be a burden for 
our grandchildren.

If I were a decently paid worker in Alaska or Norway I would refuse to accept 
the UBI on principle. I imagine you would think that to be pretty extreme. So also 
imagine the spiritual violence of the psychological hypocrisy burden were I living 
in a UBI nation without a decent wage?

We also know the Andrew Yang version of UBI is a "tax on the rich pay-for" which 
is an utter chimera. Rich people already have abundant savings. They do not like 
getting taxed, so will seek all means necessary to reduce their tax burden, which 
means the real cost is always passed off onto the poor, ultimately. Even if the tax 
pay-for reduced private wealth, that does not limit the power of the rich. They 
still will have savings, so will still have leverage power. 

This whole meme of the "good rich" saying, "Please tax me! Please!" is sad and 
hilarious at the same time.

If they were serious they'd just give away all their spare cash. Why wait for the 
tax man to do it?

## Future Prospects

If you are one of those who currently support UBI and are ignorant of MMT, fair 
enough, but please go educate yourself. If you still support UBI do not thank me 
later for warning you about the ills of UBI. Just your thinking 
alone makes me ill and I want nothing to do with you, let alone your actual policy 
implementation. I do not want or need your thanks. I'd rather you think for 
yourself and work it out, without a bitter person like me to tell you not to sh1t 
all over the working class.

If humanity sorts itself out more peacefully and in unity then we will see a small 
Job guarantee program in every country and expanded public sector employment for 
skilled workers. I do have some optimism about this, because not everyone on this 
planet is batshit stupid. And even UBI shills are not necessarily greedy selfish 
people, they're just ignorant and lazy in their thinking. I can tolerate a bit of 
laziness. Especially the mathematical, engineering, and programming kind, which 
work their butts off today to a ridiculous degree just to avoid harder work tomorrow, 
thus tomorrow freeing up time to do more engineering they'd otherwise not have time 
to do. And why? Not for a pay check, but because it is cool *and* has a pay check.


<table style="border-collapse: collapse; border=0;">
    <colgroup>
       <col span="1" style="width: 35%;">
       <col span="1" style="width: 15%;">
       <col span="1" style="width: 25%;">
    </colgroup>
<tr style="border: 1px solid color:#0f0f0f;">
<td style="border: 1px solid color:#0f0f0f;"><a href="../28_mushrooms">Previous chapter</a></td>
<td style="border: 1px solid color:#0f0f0f; text-align:center;"><a href="../">Back to Posts</a></td>
<td style="border: 1px solid color:#0f0f0f; text-align:right;"><a href="./">Next chapter</a></td>
</tr>
<tr style="border: 1px solid color:#0f0f0f;">
<td style="border: 1px solid color:#0f0f0f;"><a href="../28_mushrooms">Mushrooms and University</a></td>
<td style="border: 1px solid color:#0f0f0f; text-align:center;"><a href="../">TOC</a></td>
<td style="border: 1px solid color:#0f0f0f; text-align:right;"><a href="./">(TBD)</a></td>
</tr>
</table>
