---
title: "Semantics of MMT"
description: ""
date: 2023-01-01
lastmod: 2023-01-01
cover: ""
coverAlt: ""
katex: true
tags: []
---

One good thing about joining Douglas the MMT Trader is that I get exposed to trolls and critiques who want to debunk MMT. This might be fodder for several posts, so this is a Part-1. I am **_not-** going to launch inot esoteric philosophy and money crankery, so don't be scared. My approach is more mathematical. In the sciences, and let's be generous and call macroeconomics a social science (there is theory and empirical data 
to test it, just not always conclusively), so we can formulate definitions, and theorems using the definitions, and then test them. 

((If you think we cannot then you are on another planet like Yanis Varoufakis, and we 
cannot easily communicate my friend. Seriouly though, what Yanis syas is that we 
cannot replicate trials, so economics is not like other sciences. But social sciences 
have always been this way, you cannot lab replicate an entire human culture. Science 
is however not defined by "needs replicated control trials". RCT's are only one 
method available to a science, if RCT's are not available you have to test theories 
and models in other ways, which can be done, it is just not as easy. Besides which, 
RCT's are controlled, and the real world is often not, so RCT's cannot ever 
constitute all of empirics in science.))

## Is Economics a Science?

What Varoufakis gets correct is that a lot of professional economists are  in fact 
not engaged in any science. In this he would agree with someone like Steve Keen who 
would also say the mainstream Neoclassical school of economics is not a science.  
What is it then? The answer is that it is a mathematical theory. If formulated 
consistently it violates common presumptions in the real world, like existence of a 
stable equilibrium price vector, and so for this, and a few other reasons, 
Neoclassical economics is a fictional fantasy. If consistent, it is not applicable to 
the real world. If inconsistent then it is invalid in every possible world.

### Definitions Give Formal Semantics

The idea of a definition is to convey meaning, but this is only possible if we are 
communicating with some sentient conscious "knower". If not, then we are just 
formalising our thinking for ourselves, but that can be a worthwhile thing to do. 
define what you mean, make it a record, then you can have what Wittgenstein thought 
was impossible: a private language.

If someone uses a different definition for a word, say "money", to us, then we have the possibility of needless debate and argument. I do not wish to engage in that sort of thing. So if you re going to communicate meaningfully with us as MMT aware activists, you will ned to either accept, temporarily, our definitions, or lay-out your own and beg us to temporarily explore yours.

In MMT we have a simple enough definition of "money:

* **Money** is an IOU of the issuer. Whatever the issuer promises in redemption for the IOU dictates (perhaps subjectively() the *vlaue* of the money (what it is worth to you, how much effort you will be prepared to obtain their IOU.)

Notice no such thing as a "bank" is yet mentioned. Money can indeed exist without 
banks, but an IOU does require some sort of record keeper, even it is you keeping the 
record in your head. In the real world these are normally banks, or one of the 
functions of banks. 

We then have another new definition, for *state currency* or 
state money:

* **State currency** is an IOU of the state, for normative purposes MMT defines the state currency to be a *tax credit*. The state owes you redemption of one unit of tax liability when you return their currency tokens.

The phrase "the money" is ambiguous, since it can refer to the tokens, or the account 
records, or the units of the records (unit of account). Provided you appreciate there 
is this ambiguity we will allow you to talk to us using the word "money" if it is 
clear enough from context which meaning you are employing.

With a few other definitions and axioms (simple postulates that we agree need not be proven) which I will not belabour by writing them all down, MMT can now define 


## Why People Troll MMT --- Positive Money and All That

The reason we find a lot of trolls making rude or obnoxious comments on MMT related content on social media, is usually (not always) because they are using different semantics, different definitions.

If you define "money" as the account records emitted by private banks, and only by private banks, then it is debateable whether this can be considered state currency.

However, if the state accepts the bank creted records as redemption for tax 
liabilities, then the state is in cooperation with the private banks making it be so 
(by law) that the bank credit is state currency. Or, the state might say you need 2 
units of bank credit to redeem one unit of their tax liabilities. (They usually do 
not, but they could.)

People troll MMT because they think their definition is the one and only true 
definition.

It is a bit infantile, because definitions only matter when they are employed to 
theorize or model. So if you can come up with a model where the dominant monetary 
form in a region is the bank credit, issued *only* by private banks, and the 
governments are only getting in on the action by imposing tax liabilities denominated 
in the bank currencies, then you have some grounds to argue against MMT theory.

MMT says the state currency is a unit of account *of the state* created by the law of 
the land, not by banks. Banks can however obtain licences to operate credit 
facilities from the state. This is in fact objectively true, if one examines the law 
in any nation that has a state currency driven by taxation, and a banking payments 
system.

So now we have the opportunity for departures in theories based upon the definitions.

We can ask,

1. Do governments need to borrow credit from banks, which they have to repay with interest, in order to get the state currency into the government account books?
2. Why do banks allow the government to vote to issue more of the bank's currency? Or rather, why does a government with an army and police force permit private weakling banks to dictate the credit supply? To even pose these questions is conceding the principle! These are not applicable questions! You can ask them,but the answers are trival.

The answers are that governments never borrow from banks, and (2) governments never 
take orders from banks. It is the other way around. But if you want to appear insane, 
and test your sanity, we can examine the software and accounting law and practices 
and check to see if you are posing a sensible question. You will find you are not. 
Governments, of any reasonable sized population, *define* their currency, and 
*permit* banks to operate as private payments and deposit holding services. Like our 
bus system (in Wellington, New Zealand) which is publicly licenced, but privately run 
for profit --- they could not operate without our city council's approval.

(((Philosophically, is a private public service provider really "in the private 
sector", or are they really in the public sector? The answer is, it depends upon your 
definitions. So do not be a nerd if someone says otherwise to what you think here. 
One definition: Public service contractors are in the private sector when they clock 
off work, and in the public sector when they are on the job if the government is 
contracting them. This might not be your definition. To see if it matters, you have 
to check what is legally enforceable: what workers rights do the contractors have? 
Are they civil service protections, or the private sector wild west?))

Notice we have already crossed over into MMT land, because we are talking about 
account records, not gold. Governments (most of them anyway) have no interest anymore 
in gold. Fort Knox in the USA viewed as a backing for the US dollar is a charade. It 
is a store of gold, that might be used for future space travel optoelectronics. But 
that is all. These days it never gets shipped around in any significant amounts to 
back any payments system, and this was signed by law in the 1930's when the USA 
stopped redeeming for gold domestically, then again in 1972 when the USA stopped the 
charade of Bretton-Woods (a quasi gold standard, but really based on the US dollar, 
but the USA was technically still promising redemption fo gold up until 1972.  No 
longer.).

It is possible some utter catastrophe could destroy all branches of the US 
government, then the IRS might stop functioning and the demand for the USD collapse 
to zero, and water or coffee beans or gold might become a medium of exchange for a 
while until a new government with tax authority and enforcement is formed. Then Fort 
Know *might* get raided, and whoever raids the most *mght* find themselves as the new 
monopoly issuer of a private currency (records that it promises to redeem for gold).

I love, or love to laugh at, pedants who say this is why MMT is false. When exactly 
do they think the USA will collapse?  Sure it could happen, but until it does the US 
dollar system is well-described by MMT.










[Next post (TBD)](./)  
[Previous post (Accelerators and Repellers)](../7_accelerators_repellers)  
[Back to Blog TOC](../)
