---
title: "Finance Politics"
description: ""
date: 2023-01-02
lastmod: 2023-01-02
cover: ""
coverAlt: ""
katex: true
toc: true
tags: []
---

Itching for a scrap with something that can't fight back, here I am going to combat 
some of Daniel Neilson's substack 
posts ([Soon Parted](https://www.soonparted.co/)). Not because I disagree, but 
because I find Daniel's blog informative, but lacking an MMT lens. But he gets a lot 
right, and is a student of Mehrling's, so he understands balance sheets and whatnot. 
So with Daniel Nielson we are not dealing with some unhinged libertarian or Austrian 
School fantasist.

As we mentioned on the MMT Macro Trader livestream (Jan 4, 2023) it is good to have 
dissension in a field of knowledge that is uncertain. This is not because of some 
warped analogy to darwinism, but rather more explicit. We *know* political economy is 
generated by imperfect human beings, and so we *know* it is not probably ever going 
to be a settled body of theory like, say, physics.


## Finance Politics

Politics is the art of governing, and economics is the fair distribution of output,
while finance is the study of using a currency system (records of credits and debits) 
to achieve the fair distribution.

The phrase "[political economy of finance](https://www.soonparted.co/p/credit)" 
in Daniel's [Morocco substack post series](https://www.soonparted.co/p/credit), 
merges these three concepts. This is hazardous, because of several contradictions 
when the theory is exposed to the real world. I will talk about a few of these.

### Finance is corruptible

Because the power of who governs is a source of corruption, and the governors of 
the financial system are open to corruption, "finance politics" must address not 
just the reality of MMT, but also the way the monetary system is abused.

The result of such abuses is a breakdown of the goal of fair distribution 
(the economics). The abuse almost always originates from the politics. To complete 
a bit of a circle: the means to abuse the politics most often resides in 
financial assets, and the more unfairly they are distributed, the more the 
tendency towards corruption.

One source of corruption is failure to recognize that we **_do not live in a pure 
capitalist system_**. All major nations today have a currency monopoly, and it is the 
public monopoly, the government as the issuer of the currency.

This is something Nielson does not *lead* with, maybe deliberately, I cannot tell, but 
it is poor pedagogy. Nielson begins instead with pure capitalism (a gross 
idealization) and the phrase: "A business that specializes in credit we can call a 
bank."
True. But the government *also* specializes in credit --- **tax credit** --- and is 
called a Parliament or Congress, not a bank. the government will however create a 
special type of bank, the central bank, which has the principle function of regulating 
the payments system for currency in the state's unit of account.

In fact, the government is so powerful the "banks" end up asking for licences from 
the state to use the state's tax credits for their credit. 

The Sequence is vital to understand, and is similar to Warren Mosler's 
[Sequence](/ohanga-pai/questions/1_basic_ohangapai/#money_story). 
The sequence here is *first* the state issues tax liabilities, *then second* they 
issue currency which functions as tax credit, "that which can be redeemed for 
extinguishing tax liabilities." Governments are not all stupid, they retain the 
monopoly on issuance (exogenous currency injections), and allow private banks only 
the capacity to extend credit (endogenous currency injections).

((Once idiots get voted into parliaments, who do not understand this system, even 
then the Sequence stays the same, the monetary system is highly robust against idiots 
running it, but unfortunately the justice system and fair distribution are not so 
robust.))

Being licenced by the state, these private banks are effectively doing the bidding of 
the state: issuing private credit to fuel entrepreneurs who need finance capital to 
start or expand businesses prior to having sales streams.

This sounds like an important function of "capitalism," but this is not capitalism 
*qua* Marx. A socialist system can also have banks issuing private expansion credit 
--- but to whom, if business owners no longer exist?  To worker cooperatives. 
So this is myth No.1 needing busting.  The function of private credit expansion has 
nothing intrinsically to do with the class system of (I) owners of firms (first class citizens) versus (II) workers (second class citizens).


## Balance Sheets

In the third part of the lectures notes Nielson describes how balance sheets are 
used to run the credit system. The description is good. To bolster our Myth 1 bust, 
we note Nielson's high level view of the balance sheets and T-accounts, does not 
mention the class system. 

### Is there really a "borrower"

Tell me if this is too pedantic. On Nielson's explanations of balance sheets, we 
see a "lender" a bank" and "borrower". The credit  borrowed is recorded on each entities 
balance sheet. What's wrong here?

It is a macroeconomic perspective, I think --- it is missing. The banking system as 
a whole needs to be referenced in a macro analysis. When the "borrower" takes the 
credit it almost instantly (transactions delays permitting) becomes a liability of 
the banking system --- a deposit.

This deposit "came from nowhere" --- which is flowery rhetoric for the fact the bank 
just created it on a  balance sheet, nothing was printed by government, no gold 
supply was raided, no tax payer was shafted.
It is the endogenous money story.  The loan created the deposit.

There really is no "borrower" in the commonsense meaning of the word, since 
**_nothing was borrowed_**.  What happened is that a credit--debt set of records was 
created.

It is a relationship between **three parties**, not two. A customer of the 
bank (buyer) the bank, and a seller of goods (also a customer of some bank, 
usually, absent drug lords etc).

1. Customer (a buyer) got credit (they can spend = asset, but have to repay = liability).
2. Bank got a promise to repay (bank asset), but also a deposit (the seller of goods 
banked the payment).
3. Seller got rid of assets (real assets) and gained credit (the deposit).

Those are six balance sheet entries, minimum (the central bank has not get got 
involved in our story, but are in the background adding two more balance sheet 
entries regarding movements of reserves at the end of a settlement period). It is as 
Randall Wray and now Steve Keen would recognize, not just quadruple entry 
book-keeping, but octuple.  Octuple that is, if we follow the whole credit-spend 
cycle. Just a single transaction (just the credit issue) remains quadruple entry, 
until the central bank clearing gets computed, but that's usually a few hours later 
(used to be weeks later).

Pure borrowers and lenders do exist, but they do not involve banks. 
Savings & loans firms, savings cooperatives, and shadow banks all operate without 
endogenous money, they "circulate and hold" only, no new money gets created. 
However, to fuel a monetary production system the circulation of the currency is 
critical. So these non-bank quasi-bank institutions can serve a useful purpose, they 
allow circulation of savings.  Banks do not. Banks gum things up for a monetary 
economy, but when they issue credit they fuel the economy, it is a dual purpose and 
it pays to understand both functions. Credit issuance is a demand add, savings a 
demand drain.

Did Steve Keen's [Minksy](https://sourceforge.net/projects/minsky/) 
model "prove" this? Not really, unless you have a very liberal 
notion of "proof". But I will talk about that in another article another day.


### Beware the Ideals --- capitalism is not capitalism

The final statement for the first in the 
[Moroccan series](https://www.soonparted.co/p/credit) is, 

> "The purpose of this course is to help us understand the system of credit relationships, and by doing so, to better understand capitalism itself."

As I said, Nielson is a smart dude and teaches well. But here he is teaching folks 
about a system that does not exist. If we only focus on endogenous money operations 
we ignore the most important institution in the whole system, the monopoly issuer, 
the government.

Time to repeat Warren Mosler's pithy definition of MMT:

> **MMT** is recognizing the currency as a public monopoly and the implications thereof.

Libertarians and anarchists might not like this knowledge, but too bad, it is the 
system we face today. The question is whether or not justice for the oppressed can 
be found within such a system, or with a similar but reformed system, or whether all 
government needs to be torn down and begun again from grass roots? If the latter is 
your proposal, you face serious questions about how to achieve it non-violently.


## Securing Justice 

I will now be generous and optimistic: If you are prepared to tolerate intellectual 
violence, I think the nature and function of democratic government is both reformable 
and can be revolutionized in many ways, without physical violence. With intellectual 
warfare and spiritual warfare --- the nature of which is **_not_** analogous to 
physical war. The weapons of spiritual war are love and kindness, not hate and 
intolerance.

This is stuff Neilson and most other writers on macroeconomics leave out of almost all 
their analysis. It makes their efforts all the weaker.

When you prepare and go into such war, choose your weapons wisely. Pissing 
people off for the sake of it is not a good weapon. Gaining allies is. How do you do 
that? (I will deliberately leave that one dangling.)

If you take up a social media trolling tool (called a keyboard) my advice is to 
not troll the neoliberals. You really want them to stop and think, not unfollow you.
So give them something to chew on, in the vicinity of a cognitive dissonance. 

This is what Douglas (hopelessly materialistic nice guy) over at MMT Macro Trader 
is trying to do, and we need soldiers in this army to help. Which is why I am helping 
Douglas to explore MMT implications at the mesoeconomic level. Any intellectual fuel I can provide to mind-bomb the neoliberals is fuel worth the effort of producing.


[Next post (TBD)](./)  
[Previous post (Semantics of MMT)](../8_mmt_semantics)  
[Back to Blog TOC](../)
